This video is made possible by Nord VPN.
Stop protecting your internet experience today at Nord
vpn.com/biographics and news code biographics to get 84% off two great gifts,
four months of Nord, VPN, and Nord locker for free
The law police big brother room 1 0 1. Even if you've never heard the name,
George Orwell,
you've heard of the concepts he created as the legendary writer of animal
farm Orwell took the volatile politics of the time he lived in and used them to
create twisted dystopia and Savage SATs.
His 1984 is a Cryer ed,
still bands by repressive regimes around the world. Even now,
nearly 70 years after his death belly a day goes by without some
media personality describing something as Orwellian,
perhaps more so than any other writer of his era or Well's work is still
powerfully relevant today. Yet,
how much do we really he know about Britain's greatest modern writer born in the
early years of the 20th century, Orwell was a man of fascinating contradictions.
He was a socialist who studied at Britain's most elite school,
a passionate defender of oppressed people who despised Catholics and homosexuals
and a committed atheist who won his deathbed,
demanded a Christian funeral in today's video.
We're traveling inside the minds of this complex man and discovering the origins
of his most famous works.
Given all Well's veneration of the working classes,
you might expect to hear that he was born in straighten circumstances. Well,
actually not a bit of when Allwell was born on June the 25th,
1903 in Maha Bengal, it was into a family with claims to form a greatness.
His great-grandfather had been a wealthy slave owner.
Who'd married into the British aristocracy, leaving his family,
a fat pile of money to live on. Unfortunately,
it hadn't quite been fat enough and by the time Allwell first opened his eyes,
his father rich and had been reduced working for the British civil service in
India. Despite this both Richard and Orwell's young mother,
Ida tried to act as if they were still as rich as ever creating what Orwell
later called an atmosphere of impoverished snobbery.
Not that Allwell was actually Orwell at this point.
Orwell's birth name was Eric Arthur Blair.
He wouldn't come up with his famous pseudonym until he was 30. Still.
We're just gonna go ahead and use George Orwell when referring to him throughout
this video, because well, partly it's easier.
And partly because it's gonna annoy any massive penance watching in 1905
or 1906 Orwell's life in India came to an abrupt halt when Ida took him and
his sister back to England for their education. At first,
this meant attending a small Anglican school, not too far from Oxford,
but then Allwell turned 11 and his mother shun him off to saints.
A fashionable proprietary school near the sea sinces was exactly the sort of
place a respectable English family with aristocratic links might send their boy.
Sadly Orwell's family was by now.
So impoverished that there were anything but respectable and his new schoolmates
didn't let him forget it. In a future essay on his school days, such,
such with a joys Orwell would paint his life at Sipri and EZ.
One spent at the mercy of snobs piled upon knobs with everyone Horning over
those above them and SNA those below them still cents did its job.
As a proprietary school by 1917,
Orwell was prepared enough to win a scholarship, to eat a private school.
That's long been synonymous with posh bastards,
not that Eden and Orwell into the respectable pillar of the establishment that
his pat Aarons were hoping for.
It was while there that young Orwell began to cultivate his lifelong distrust of
authority figures to immerse himself in the works of socialist writers.
By the time Orwell graduated in 1921,
he was ready to ditch the aristocratic pretenses forever.
So instead of going to university, he went to Burma for Richard and Ida.
This was a little like her son had ditched a future at Yale to work the deeper
fat fry at a Chick-fil-A joining the colonial service was something Richard had
done out of necessity. Not out of choice,
no graduate of Eden should have been headed to Burma yet come 1922.
That's exactly where or well found himself.
He was a policeman in a colonial occupying a remote part of Asia.
He must have known he would hate it and he did,
but all Well's time in Burer would prove to be more than just an exercise in
masochism.
Rather it would be the place that transformed him from a melancholy school boy
into a melancholy writer.
When he later looked back at his time in Burma Allwell would electronically
report that nearly everyone there hated him after his arrival in 1922
had first tried to play the role of a colonial oppressor only to discover that
lording it over the Burmis made him miserable.
So he began instead to try and befriend the locals,
but while he enjoyed their companies,
the basic fact of his Englishness was a barrier to friendship. As a result,
he lived in a Twilight state ashamed of his work and ashamed of his fellow
colonials, but indelibly associated with them finally in July, 1927,
while on home leave in England or well realized, he just couldn't take any more.
He resigned from the colonial or police,
but rather than Chuck the towel in and go to university or well decided to give
his parents another heart attack, renting a cheap room in east London,
or well dressed himself as a tramp and went off to live among the poorest of the
working classes. He did that on and off for the next four years.
It's been speculated that all was trying to assuage the guilt that he'd felt
from his time in Burer the guilt of being part of a privileged elite,
actively oppressing others, whatever the truth,
right up until 1932 Orwell lived alongside tramps and beggars sometimes
loafing around London, sometimes picking hops in Kent. At some point,
he made his way to Paris where he spent a year and a half in biting poverty,
working irregularly in hotels, in Grimmy restaurants, despite this all well,
wasn't actually poor while he spends a lot of time experiencing poverty.
His life in the slums was not a constant thing.
It spent a few weeks there then returned to his parents home to decompress for a
bit as before starting the cycle.
It was this approach that gave him time to finally start writing.
Not that he crapped out masterpieces from the go though,
or Wells first tales were pretty awful.
Like the sort of pros that instinctively makes literary professors projectile
vomit across the lecture hall. The few writer, friends,
he hadd would actually read his painfully earnest stories together just to make
themselves laugh, but all well stuck with it. From 1928 to 1932,
he worked hard to improve his pros and Intel.
It finally mastered a par down minimalist style, which wasn't Hemingway,
but at least didn't send anyone who read it and just spasms of laughter for his
first book. That was good enough down and out in Paris.
London hit the bookshelves January, 1933,
a lightly fictionalized retelling of all Well's time among the destitute down
and out,
his famous today for its clear eye reporting of life at the bottom in 1933,
though,
it was potentially scandalous so much so that Orwell law in some tellings,
his publisher decided to really sit not under his birth name,
but under a pseudonym.
And so it was that Eric Arthur Blair came to be known to history as George
Orwell, while down now didn't exactly fly off the shelves.
It did earn some stellar reviews.
Good enough that Orwell's publisher asked if he had any more.
We can only hope Orwell responded with a slight smile in his three short decades
on earth. It already amassed enough material to make himself famous.
The next few years saw a stream of books from Allwell all based on his own life
down and out was followed by Burmese days.
Orwell's bitter attack on the colonial system.
But while down and out had been close to rep reportage Burmeses days introduced
one of the key characteristics of, or Wells fiction,
a lonely protagonist trapped in an oppressive system who can't seem to escape no
matter what he does a year after Burmeses days came outta clergy's daughter
landed based on all Well's own experience, working for a cheap private school.
This was followed in 1936,
by keep the ASIST flying a semi Satar of all Wells time living respected,
but on the edges of London's literary scene. Yes,
if this book was slightly tongue in cheek,
it was still haunted by all Well's pet themes of poverty and the dehumanizing
power of social systems,
which is why the same year as bistro was released.
Orwell got the offer of a lifetime.
Victor Gillens was a wealthy left wing publisher who wanted to know if Allwell
would take a commission writing about poverty in England for this glance was
willing to pay 500 pounds to make it a little easier in today's money.
That would be like someone offering you $45,000 for a short book written.
However you saw fit as Orwell probably didn't actually say Keun
for the next two months.
Orwell lived in the north of England among destitute working towns,
gathering material. It was a grim experience,
one comprising Knight of bed pans and bitter cult in Orwell's hands though it
became the road to Wiggen pier Wiggen pier is the book where Orwell famously
proclaimed in so of a socialist believe that he would hold for the rest of his
life. However,
it's also the book where Orwell took other English socialists to task for not
living by their convictions.
Victor Golan was so disappointed that he would only publish it with an
introduction that basically said, don't listen to this guy.
He's a bit of an idiot. Still Orwell got his 500 pounds. And on June the ninth,
he was a able to marry his girlfriend, Eileen Mory.
But while Wiggin,
Pierre may have seemed like the culmination of all Well's life's work events in
Europe were about to send that life careering in a whole new direction.
Back in 1931,
Spain had abolished its monarchy resulting in a new liberal Republic. At first,
the Republican ticked along, but there in 1933,
hardly conservatives had won the elections in the aftermath left-wing cattles
and Barcelona had attempted toed from Spain only to be crushed by general
Francisco Franco while Franco's bloody response,
turned him into a darling of the right. It alienated the electorate so much.
So that conservatives lost power in 1936 to a leftist coalition,
sorry.
Franco decided to just do away with elections altogether on July the 17th,
1936 Franco launched his coup across Spain,
military units rose up to deposed the government.
They were successful in many areas,
but not in all of them in Madrids and Catalonia left wing counters kept the
nationalist bay.
Suddenly one part of Spain was under the control of hard right fascists.
And the other part was under the control of hardcore leftists.
So the two sides did what came naturally.
They executed tens of thousands of subversives in their respective areas.
And then they turned their guns on one another in Britain,
the siren song of the Spanish civil war called thousands of young men to go
fight on the Republican side. On December the 23rd, 1936,
George Orwell joins their number saying goodbye to Eileen.
He stepped aboard a train headed first for the English channel and then to Paris
and then onto Barcelona. By the time he returned his life,
would've changed completely. Now, just before we continue with today's video,
I do want to tell you a bit about today's sponsor Nord VPN,
fairly appropriate for a video made about the man who wrote 1984. Now,
if you are buying things online and using a public wifi, Spotify thing,
coffee shops, airports, cetera, you rarely must be using a VPN.
And that's when Nord VPN comes in.
I know it's tempting not to bother and just rarely are the best,
but those stories you read online about people having their data stolen, people,
breaking into accounts and all of that sort of stuff. It really does happen.
So don't make it easy for people to do that to you.
Whenever I'm browsing on public wifi, I just keep ignored VPN all the time,
just running in the background.
So I don't have to worry about anyone stealing my data,
but it's not all about security.
You can also use it to change the country that you appear to be in.
So you can get content that might normally only be available in specific
geographic locations, nor VPN is super fast. So watching a video is a breeze.
There's no lag whatsoever. If you've ever used VPNs and thought slow, well,
no more with an nod VPN and you can use it on all of your devices. Very easily,
Android Chrome windows, Linux,
and on six devices at the same time with one account.
Now you might have heard about the nod breach in the news,
but it's important to point out that no user information was exposed because nod
VPN doesn't keep any logs on its servers because it doesn't give it any logs at
all. However,
Nord VPN are still taking this very seriously and are moving to a 100% owned
server model. Unlike most other VPNs,
there are also improvements to other aspects of their security taking place.
So start protecting your internet experience today at Nord vpn.com/biographics
use code biographics to get 84% off those two great gifts,
four months of Nord, VPN, and Nord lock for free. Uh, let's go back to it.
It's impossible to overstate both how complicated and how bloody the Spanish
civil war was on the bloody side. Republican mobs,
lynched clergy in the street while nationalists had their female enemies
publicly raped.
Although nominally under Republican control Barcelona was actually home to
multiple leftist factions. Some of whom hated one another's Gus.
They were anarchists cattle and nationalists Trotskyites Stalinists,
not aligns Marxists who viewed everyone with suspicion.
There were soldiers armed by and under the direction,
a USSR while out on the battlefield troops from Nazi Germany,
clandestinely trained Franco's guys,
it was into this tangled web of alliances that oil found himself plunged
headlong in January, 1937. Although nominally there to cover the war.
Orwell lost no time signing up to fight.
Initially he wanted to join the international brigades that communist unit
fighting around the grit, but this proved to be difficult.
So instead he joins poem.
Those non-aligned Marxist that we mentioned a moment ago in practical terms,
this meant,
or well briefly trained in Lenon barracks before being sent out to fights on the
arrogant front. But when we say fighter,
we really mean stand arounds in a trench. Getting really,
really bought arrogant was not action was at all after a couple of months or
well, he was climbing the walls again.
He tried to join the international brigades, but again,
it got him nowhere finally crawling with Aly board out of his mind,
or well returned to Barcelona just in time for the Mayday.
The Maydays were a super complicated power struggle that played out on the
streets of Barcelona between the communis various anarchist factions,
the cattle nationalists and various Marxist groups.
The important thing is that during the fight, the communist went after the poem.
This is how Orwell found himself,
sat on a Barcelona rooftop with a gun defending Palm headquarters.
As the left to devour itself,
all told maybe a thousand people died in five days of street violence,
but it was what came next. That was really shocking in the aftermath.
The communists began a hard propaganda drive against all groups that had opposed
them. Anyone fighting for poem was painted as a fascist,
suddenly joining the international brigades did not seem like the great test
idea. So Allwell went back to the front and there,
his story nearly ended lounging in a trench at Toul allel was shot by a fascist
sniper. The bullet passed through his throat, nearly killing him.
He lost so much blood that his death seemed inevitable.
Just think had that bullet been just a few millimeters over.
We wouldn't be here right now. George L would be a name,
no known to those teaching courses with names like socialist writers of interwar
Britain.
Thankfully though the bullet passed clean through and all well lived taken off
the fronts with permanently damaged vocal chords.
He was returned to Barcelona just in time.
Very thing to go south by the end of may, 1937,
things in the city had reached the point of no return.
The communist were moving against their enemies and the Palm was high on their
list. Still badly wounded or well realized he had no choice,
but to leave right now in the end,
he badly made it as his friends from Palm were assassinated or vanished into
jails or well,
and his wife managed to flee Catalonia for France just ahead of the clamp down.
Had they been just a few hours slower?
It had have been a well goodbye place in history and hello socialist writers of
in war Britain by the end of June, Orwell was back in Britain,
safe from the Inferno engulfing Catalonia,
but his experience in Spain had changed him B he was still a committed
socialist, or had discovered a new abiding hatred for communism.
It would be this hatred that would fuel his two greatest works
On April. The first 1939, Spain fell to Franco's forces, heralding,
a fascist victory for George Orwell.
It was just another piece of bad news in two years,
filled with it on his return from the war or well had written homage to aronia.
Now regarded as one of the best pieces of war reporting ever in 1938, though,
it was seen as a betrayal of the left wing communist leaning audience that had
cultivated over the years, despite greater reviews,
it barely shifted failing to reach even Orwell's normal loads of three to 4,000
copies salt just before its publication or well collapsed with breathing
troubles.
His subsequent diagnosis of tuberculosis only confirms that he was on a downward
trajectory by mid 1939.
Orwell was ill and loved by many of his former readers and deeply pessimistic
about the future of Europe. When war finally broke out on September the third,
it just seemed to confirm his cynicism that fall.
He tried to join up to fight the Nazis, but he was refused because of his tab.
So he joins the home guard half hoping it would become a vehicle for
revolutionary change like Palm. If you've ever watched the TV show, dad Zomi,
you can probably guess how at and out finally, in 1941,
desperate to be of some help.
Orwell joins the BBC producing propaganda for its radio division. Today.
Orwell's time at the BBC is legendary.
Not because of the work he did there almost none of which survives,
but because of the tales, for instance, it said that 1980 fours,
mental torture chamber room 1 0 1 was named for a real room where Orwell had
to sit through endless meetings. That's probably a myth,
but it does show what or well thought of his time there.
When he left in late 1943,
he couldn't wait to see the back of the place by 1944,
both Allwell and Sai were in a very bad place.
Although that recently adopted a boy called Richard both were sick with serious
illnesses. On top of that,
it wasn't a publisher in England willing to take on Orwell's latest novel fable
about who revolt against their owner. And yes, with that,
it's time to talk about animal farm,
a deceptively simple Satter on the Russian revolution and its betrayal by Stalin
animal farm is the first of all Wells two late life masterpieces,
but in 1944,
it was also a potential embarrassment Stalin's USS saw was an ally not wanting
to hurt the war effort. No one wanted to touch the book.
Eventually Orwell managed to find an American publisher,
willing to take a chance provided that they could wait until world Wari was over
Orwell agreed. And on August the 17th, 1945 animal farm hit the shelves.
It was an instant and colossal smash.
Remember when we told you Orwell's novels usually sold 4,000 copies,
each animal farm sold over a quarter million in its first year
alone. For some reason,
the fable struck a chord with readers in a way more complex,
fair like homage to Catalonia, never did. Maybe it was the timing.
Maybe it was the endless quoteability like the moments the pigs pronounce,
all animals are equal, but some animals are more equal than others. Well,
for whatever reason,
animal farm was the hit or well dreamed of writing the money poured in.
He became famous.
The CIA even contacted him for permission to translate his book to Russian and
smuggle it into the Soviet union. Yet Orwell felt no joy at any of this.
Just five months before animal farms release Eileen had died of cancer while
Orwell was away on a newspaper assignment outwardly or well Bo her death with
stoicism. But inside, inside, he was a mess and angry,
guilty, bitter mess. Early next year, he took his adopted son,
Richard and left London for good by now,
his tuberculosis was nearly terminal as man and boy headed to the remote islands
of Scotland.
It must have seems like well was shortly going to go the same way as Eileen,
but not quite yet. Allwell still had one last book in him.
And it was this final book written as he drifted towards death's doorway.
That would change the world.
If you look up the definition of remote in the dictionary,
you'll find a picture of Jah islands. Actually that's a lie.
We just wanted a more interesting way of saying JIRA is pretty remote without
just saying JIRA is pretty remote,
but JIRA is remote and the house Allwell and Richard moved into was remote.
Even for JIRA, it was eight miles from the nearest phone,
25 miles from the nearest village to get from there to London would take over
two days. Naturally. Allwell loved it for years.
It'd been turning a story over in his head,
a dystopian sci-fi fantasy that would mix together his thoughts on communism.
What had seen in Catalonia and totalitarianism generally now that he was
effectively alone, amid jurors, bleak wilderness.
He could devote himself to the book entirely for the next few months.
All well worked. 10 hour days hunched over a small desk chain,
smoking cigarettes and working on his novel by February, 1948.
He had a first draft famously.
He swapped last two digits of the date to make the title. 1984,
that done. He promptly collapsed and nearly died of tuberculosis.
Rushed to the hospital.
Allwell was forced to undergo brutal treatments just to survive.
He had air injected directly into his lungs was given experimental medicines
that caused an allergic reaction that nearly killed him desperate to get his
last novel out. Before he kicked the bucket,
he tried to hire a typist to take dictation when no one responded.
He simply sat in bed getting weaker and weaker as he typed away.
By the end of the year, he was back on juror again,
where he finished the second draft almost immediately. He collapsed again.
From that point on,
he spent most of what remained of his life in sanatoriums by January, 1949.
Orwell was barely clinging to the world of the living.
The effort of hanging in there itself almost killing him. Yes. Hang on.
He did until June the eighth, 1949,
when 1984 was finally published almost immediately,
the fight began over what it meant for some the novels vision of Britain under a
sta dictatorship that watches people's every move and police,
their thoughts represented Orwell's final break with the left for others.
It was another Satir of the USS arm. This time.
One with far darker undertones than animal farm others saw in it's a veiled
attack on the Catholic church's role in the inquisition while yet others thought
it was an allegory for the post world war II order,
where conferences at Y had carved up the globe.
But that's part of the genius of 1984. It can be reinterpreted in so many ways,
free market, libertarian, committed anarchist and anti Stalin, communist,
and an old stuffy British conservative could all claim it as their own. Sadly,
none of them had a chance to ask if they were right on January the 21st,
1950 George Orwell died of his tuberculosis age, just 46,
barely three months before they had married. Richard's old babysitter,
Sonya the model for Julia in 19 84,
1 of O Well's last act was to ask for a Christian burial,
although he was a lifelong atheist,
it seems he just couldn't refuse a traditional goodbye.
Not that it seems Western culture will ever truly say good by it or all.
Well in the decade after A's death, Sonya Allwell methodically republished,
his old and out of print works. Thanks to animal farms, mega popularity.
People were now ready to read, forgotten gems,
like coming up for air or essays like a hanging or shooting an elephant by
1960 Orwell status as a literary icon was cemented in Britain.
There were animated films of animal farm in the 1970s,
David Bowie first tried to produce a glam rock musical and then released a
concept album based on 1984 come the actual year,
1984 Orwell's work was so well known that it triggered a 12 month media
today. George Awell is a bonafide literary superstar,
a novelist whose name is as recognizable as that of Hemingway.
But even after all this time, the man himself remains a mystery.
As we stated in our opening, oh,
well it was a man of many contradictions and inte that refused to be classified,
just type or well into Google's news tab.
And you'll find a left and right wing writers,
both using his name to decry their opponents, remainers,
and Brexiters capitalists and socialists, everyone and his dog.
They're all convinced that they've got all well SUT,
but to assume you can just star all well into a box and label him misses the
point all his life, all well made a virtue of speaking his mind,
even if it meant biting the hands that fed him,
even if it meant playing devil's advocate in the ends,
we shouldn't think of Allwell as something as simplistic as a left wing writer,
R right wing writer.
Perhaps we should just think of him as a writer who tried to tackle hypocrisy
wherever he saw. It never compromising in his vision of a pH society.
You may have only let after may 46 years,
but in his short time on earth or well managed to create complex masterpieces
that define interpretation come 20, 84 or even 2184.
It seems likely that we'll still be reading them.
So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that like button and don't forget to subscribe. Also,
please do support this channel by a fantastic sponsor. Nord VPN.
There's a link to them below and as always, thank you for watching.